Let's do the last exercise in this
course before I release you and
your brain from this vise of
knowledge that I'm throwing at you,
this curse of knowledge.
Let's talk about Bloom filters,
which is just like a fun thing to say,
it sounds like it's a really
happy data structure,
actually think it's named after
the guy that invented it.
They normally are, I can't remember why
it's actually called a Bloom filter, but
here we are.
Bloom filters are something that you
actually do see quite a bit out in
the wild today.
There's actually a really great article
here on medium about medium itself that I
dropped in here if you
wanna take a look at it.
And I also put the Wikipedia
article in here so you can see,
here's a bunch of places where
people are using Bloom filters.
So what is a Bloom filter?
The Bloom filter is a data
structure that was designed so
that we could ask it questions
about extremely large data sets and
it could give us an answer of no or
maybe, right?
So it's a way that you design a set.
And so when I say a set I mean
I can add things to a set and
then I can later go back and
ask the set do you have this in your set?
And we actually did this already
with graphs, so let's just hop
back over to graphs so I can show you
concretely what I'm talking about.
Here I have this set called seen, right?
And this is a set.
And then later I ask scene hey,
have you seen this connection before, and
it says yes or no, right?
This has been added to my set, or
this has not been added to my set.
This is 100% accurate, right?
If you ask it have you seen number 32, it
will give you the definitive answer of yes
I have seen 32, or no I have not seen 32
before and it will be 100% correct always.
A Bloom filter, well, so the downside
of this particular set implementation
though is that you must store
everything in the set, right?
Everything that I add to the set
has to be stored somewhere, so
if I add 100 million things to the set,
it has to store 100 million things, right?
This is where Bloom filters
can be kind of interesting,
storing 100 million things
doesn't sound like fun,
what if I could store way less things and
get most of the same advantage?
That's what a bloom filter is.
A Bloom filter,
you can add things to it and
it does kind of a little bit of a trick to
say, hey, I might have seen this before,
or no,
I have definitely never seen this before.
So by trading off that accuracy,
you can drastically reduce how much
storage you're using, so
let's talk about when that would be.
Normally we don't want a margin of
error with our data structures, right?
That's not something that's desirable
about a data structure, however,
using a lot less space can be.
So, in this medium article right
here that I'd linked you to,
they talk about their
recommendation engine.
In the recommendation engine, you scroll
down to the bottom of your article and
they recommend you 3 more articles
that you might like to read.
Medium doesn't want to ask you,
hey, you should read this for
something that you've already read before.
However, it's impractical for medium to
store for every user every single time
how many things that they have read
that are related to something.
That would be an enormous data set
given how many users medium has.
So, what they have done instead is
they use a Bloom filter to say, hey,
has this user ever read
this article before?
And the answer is either no, they have
never read this article before, or maybe,
they might have read this article before.
And the advantage here is that,
if they don't recommend something that you
haven't read before, that's okay, right?
It's okay for
them to just say, here's 3 things that
we definitely know you have never read.
And so
they're okay with that trade off of,
we're willing to not recommend articles
that they haven't read before to
trade off in favor of
much smaller storage.
And we can always show them things
that they had never read before.
Is that kind of make sense?
It's just,
they have this acceptable margin of error.
And you might ask how big
is the margin of error?
And then, it depends on how much
space you're willing to take.
If you're willing to take a lot of space
you can get that margin of error down
to like 1% or 0.1% or something like that.
If you're not willing to do that,
it'll get up to 50%
margin of error it depends on how
big you make the data structure.
So, let's say that we have a Bloom
filter with 10 elements in it, right?
The way that we're gonna model a Bloom
filter is we're gonna have an array of
0s and 1s.
A 1 means that it has been seen before,
and
a 0 means that it has
not been seen before.
What I'm gonna do is I'm gonna run
whatever string that I'm trying to put in
the array.
So let's say I'm trying to
put Brian in my set, right?
In my Bloom filter.
I'm gonna run it through 2 to 5
hashing functions, all right?
Even 8, right?
You can as many hashing
functions as you wanna do.
The more hashing functions you use,
the more space you're gonna use, but
also yeah, it just depends on kind of the
margin of error that you wanna do there.
So let's say I'm doing it through 3,
I'm gonna run Brian through 3
different hashing functions.
And a hashing function if you're
not familiar with something,
just takes a number or takes a string and
converts it to a number, right?
So in this particular case, I'll run it
through 3 different hashing functions.
Let's say one of them gives me 2,
one gives me 5, and one gives me 8.
I'll go back to my data structure here and
I will flip the two elements to 1,
the five elements to 1, and
the eight element to 1, okay?
Now if I go back later and say hey,
have you seen Brian before?
I will run it through
the same hashing functions,
which will definitely give me back 2,
5, and 8 again, right?
And I'll look at 2, 5, and
8 here and it will say maybe,
I might have seen Brian before,
in which case I wouldn't use it, right?
Now, if I go back and
ask later have I seen Sarah before?
Let's say that it gives me 2,
2, and 4, so I go to 0, 1, 2,
this one has been seen before, right?
So there's that, and it goes to 4
which is this one, which is a 0,
because 0 hasn't been flipped before,
it definitely has never seen Sarah before,
for sure, right?
So if it encounters any 0s
here you can go ahead and say,
I've never seen Sarah before,
you can safely use that one
Okay, so let's say that we add one more
item to the array which is Simona,
which gives me back back 0, 4, and 5,
if we went through hashing functions.
So now I erase this.
Now if I go back and ask Sarah again,
if you remember that was 2,
2, 4, so 2, 2, and 4.
Despite the fact that it has never seen
Sarah before, it's gonna say yeah, maybe I
might have seen Sarah before and in this
case it would be a false positive, right?
It would be coming back to you and say,
I might have seen this before when
in reality it hadn't seen it before.
That's the entire gist of
Bloom filters right there.
Instead I could be storing Sarah,
Simona, and Brian in the set, and
I could get a 100% accuracy.
But with this, even if I add 100 elements,
I still need to take 10 items in
the array, if I had a 100 elements,
then I'm definitely gonna get false
positives every single time, right?
But I would still only take
10 items in the array, right?
I wouldn't have to store 100 things.
Okay.
So, the more items you
add to a Bloom filter,
the more you increase the false positive
rate that should be pretty obvious.
You can mitigate this by
having a larger array.
You can also have more or less hashing
functions depending on how much memory
you're willing to fill up versus how
many false positive you wanna be, right?
So let's say I added one
more hashing function, and
that returned 9 for Sarah, right?
In that case,
I wouldn't have gotten a false positive.
So the more hashing functions
you're willing to add as well
means you're likely gonna
get less false positives.
Not totally true, because whenever you add
things as well, yeah, so you kind of have
to mess around with it to kind of really
figure out what your false positives rate.
You get really mathematical with
the false positive rate, so yeah,
definitely just check out the Wikipedia
they explain it pretty well there.